# Lustre v5.1.0 released!

Last month we released [Lustre v5.0.0](./2025-04-19.html) with a focus on making
the framework more attractive for production use: huge performance improvements,
better integration with the Web as a platform, and a much better engineering
culture around tests and benchmarks of the framework itself. This month we're
continuing that trend by making it easier to write robust tests for your view
functions and applications.

## Writing tests without a browser

Like any other kind of application, it's often helpful to write tests for your
frontend apps to make sure they work correctly! This often ends up being a lot of
automated browser tests that can quickly grind your CI to a halt.

To help encourage a positive testing culture, Lustre now includes two new modules
that allow you to write tests that don't need a browser at all. These are
`lustre/dev/query` and `lustre/dev/simulate`. Let's take a quick look at each of
them.

### Using queries to write view snapshots

The `lustre/dev/query` module allows you to take an `Element` and extract a
portion of the view to make it easier to [snapshot test using birdie](https://hexdocs.pm/birdie/index.html).
Snapshot tests save the rendered HTML of a view to a file and then every time the
test runs, it compares the current output to the saved output. If they differ,
the test fails and you get a chance to review the output and accept or reject the
change.

Let's say we have the view function for a page that we want to test. Snapshotting
the entire page's HTML would make it difficult to see what changed, so instead
let's write a test that just snapshots the hero:

```gleam
import app/page/index
import birdie
import lustre/dev/query
import lustre/element

pub fn hero_test() {
  let selector = query.tag("section") |> query.and(query.class("hero"))
  let assert Ok(element) = query.find(in: index.view(), matching: selector)

  element
  |> element.to_readable_string
  |> birdie.snap("The hero section of the landing page")
}
```

The selector we've written reads plainly and does exacltly what you'd expect: it
finds the first `<section>` element with the class `"hero"` in the view. Because
this is a test, we want it to crash if the element can't be found so we use Gleam's
`let assert` syntax to make sure the test fails if the element can't be found.
Then we convert the element to a string and get birdie to take a snapshot of it.

When we run the test, birdie automatically generates the following file for us:

```
---
version: 1.2.6
title: The hero section of the landing page
file: ./test/app_test.gleam
test_name: hero_test
---
<section class="hero content">
  <h2>
    The Universal Framework
  </h2>
  <p>
    Static HTML, SPAs, Web Components, and interactive Server Components.
  </p>
  <button class="cta">
    Get Started
  </button>
</section>
```

Nice! There's a lot of good reasons to write tests like this:

- A HTML snapshot is much easier to review than a dump of the internal Lustre
  virtual DOM.

- The test is written in pure Gleam and doesn't require any external dependencies
  or a browser to run: you can run these tests on either the Erlang or JavaScript
  target, and you can use whatever test runner you want.

- Because we test the top-level `view` and then query for parts we care about, we
  test things hollistically. If we refactor our view code we won't have to update
  the test as long as the output is the same, and if it changes we can see what
  changed and accept or reject it.

Now imagine we change the copy in our hero section. When the we re-run the test
birdie has our back and presents us with a diff!

```
── mismatched snapshots ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

  title: The hero section of the landing page
  file: ./test/app_test.gleam
  test_name: hero_test

  - old snapshot
  + new snapshot

─────────┬──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       1 │   <section class="hero content">
       2 │     <h2>
       3 │       The Universal Framework
       4 │     </h2>
       5 │     <p>
  6      -       Static HTML, Single-page applications, Web Components, and interactive Server Components.
       6 +       Static HTML, SPAs, Web Components, and interactive Server Components.
       7 │     </p>
       8 │     <button class="cta">
       9 │       Get Started
      10 │     </button>
      11 │   </section>
─────────┴──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

  a accept  accept the new snapshot
  r reject  reject the new snapshot
  s skip    skip the snapshot for now
```

These kinds of tests are obviously no good for testing how things **look**, but
they are an excellent and quick way to confirm that the _structure_ of your view
is correct.

### Simulating your application

Sometimes we might know that a particular view produces the correct HTML, but we
want to know if a sequence of actions in our app will _get us_ to that view. You
could create a sequence of messages, fold over your `update` function, and then
take a snapshot of your `view` using that final `Model`, but what if you want to
make sure your event listeners are working properly, or you want to make sure the
right _sequence of views_ is produced?

The `lustre/dev/simulate` module allows you to take the core building blocks of a
Lustre application - your `init`, `update`, and `view` functions - and simulate a
running app.

Here it is in action:

```gleam
import app
import app/user.{User}
import lustre/dev/simulate
import lustre/dev/query
import lustre/element

pub fn user_login_test() {
  let form = query.element(query.test_id("login-form"))
  let app =
    simulate.application(app.init, app.update, app.view)
    |> simulate.start(Nil)
    |> simulate.event(on: query.element(form), name: "submit", payload: [
      #("email", json.string("lucy@gleam.run")),
      #("password", json.string("strawberry")),
    ])

  let assert Ok(_) =
    query.find(
      in: simulate.view(app),
      matching: query.element(matching: query.content("Loading...")),
    )
    as "Should show loading state while logging in"

  let response = Ok(User(name: "Lucy", email: "lucy@gleam.run", role: "mascot"))

  app
  |> simulate.message(ApiReturnedSession(response))
  |> simulate.view
  |> element.to_readable_string
  |> birdie.snap("The dashboard after logging in")
}
```

Woah, that's quite a lot to unpack. In this small snippet we've shown you can:

- Pass your app's existing `init`, `update`, and `view` functions to create a
  simulated application.

- Simulate events on an element by passing a query, the name of the event to
  simulate, and a custom payload for your app's actual event handler to decode.

- Interrupt the simulation to assert something about the current state of the view.

- Simulate messages from effects and other external systems.

Importantly, the simulation **doesn't simulate effects**. This keeps the test
pure and allows you to focus on the sequence of messages and interactions you
expect without needing to mock out the entire world. If you want to test your real
effects, _that's_ when you should pull in a browser and run a full end-to-end
test!

Packages that do handle effects are encouraged to provide their own simulation
functions that wrap `simulate.message`. You can find examples of this in both
[`modem`](https://hexdocs.pm/modem/modem.html#simulate) and
[`rsvp`](https://hexdocs.pm/rsvp/rsvp.html#simulate).

We hope these two apis will encourage folks to write more tests for their Lustre
applications without slowing them down. Keep your eyes peeled for next release
where we'll be making even bigger strides in this space 👀.

## Better support for uncontrolled inputs

In Lustre there are two ways to work with stateful DOM elements like forms and
inputs: "controlled" inputs that are syncronised with your application's `Model`
and "uncontrolled" inputs that let the DOM manage the state of the element instead.

Uncontrolled inputs can often be nicer to work with in cases where you don't *need*
to know about every single input, just the final value, but they had one important
shortcoming: because your application doesn't controll the input anymore, you can't
set an initial value!

This release, we've added the `default_value` attribute that allows you to prefill
an uncontrolled input with a value. This only affects the input while the user
hasn't **touched** it, which means the default value is slightly different to a
placeholder. Instead, you might use this to prefill a form with a user's email
address already associated with their account but still allow them to change it
if they want to:

```gleam
import app/user.{type User}
import formal.{type Form}
import gleam/function
import lustre/element.{type Element}
import lustre/element/html

pub fn update_email_form(
  for user: User,
  on_submit to_msg: fn(Result(String, Form)) -> msg
) -> Element(msg) {
  let handle_submit = fn(values) {
    form.decoding(function.identity)
    |> form.with_values(values)
    |> form.field("email", form.email |> form.and(form.must_not_be_empty))
    |> form.finish
    |> to_msg
  }

  html.form([event.on_submit(handle_submit)], [
    html.input([
      attribute.type_("email"),
      attribute.name("email"),
      attribute.default_value(user.email),
    ]),
    html.button([attribute.type_("submit")], [
      text("Update email"),
    ]),
  ])
}
```

## And the rest

We've also added more attributes to `lustre/attribute` for working with
HTML tables, made it possible to use both [`event.debounce`](https://hexdocs.pm/lustre/lustre/event.html#debounce)
and [`event.throttle`](https://hexdocs.pm/lustre/lustre/event.html#throttle) on
the same event, and squashed a bunch of bugs!

---

Lustre is still largely maintained by me – Hayleigh – with the support of a small
number of contributors. To my existing sponsors on GitHub, thank you! Your support
has fueled me with both motivation and caffeine to keep the project growing 💕.

If you're interested in supporting Lustre, one of the best things you can do is
build something with it and tell everyone about it!

If you or your company are using Lustre in production, please consider supporting
the project financially over on [GitHub sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/hayleigh-dot-dev).
