# Better dev tooling with `lustre_dev_tools` v2

As many of Lustre's users are new to frontend or would prefer to avoid modern
JavaScript toolchains, Lustre's own development tooling has become a core part of
the developer experience.

## No more native dependencies

One of the standout improvements in this release is the move away from the Erlang
[fs](https://hex.pm/packages/fs) package and the need for the Erlang build tool
to compile a native C program for file system watching. This was most-commonly
a sticking point for Windows users, where rebar3 is often packaged separately to
Erlang/OTP and can be difficult or confusing to set up correctly.

With Lustre Dev Tools v2, we have moved to using [Bun](https://bun.sh) for bundling
and as a side effect can piggy back off of Bun's built-in file watching capabilities.
This means dev tools no longer needs to compile native code and onboarding should
be much smoother for folks new to Lustre, Gleam, and the BEAM.

## TOML-based configuration

The number of Gleam-based development tools is steadily growing and with it has
come some conversations on how to handle configuration more consistently. After
some discussion, the community mostly settled on a `tools.*` table in `gleam.toml`
inspired by Python's `pyproject.toml`.

In an effort to push this standard forward, Lustre's new dev tools support a wide
variety of configuration options under the `tools.lustre.*` namespace. A typical
configuration for a Lustre project going forward might look something like this:

```toml
[tools.lustre.bin]
# Use the system-installed `bun` binary instead of downloading one automatically.
bun = "system"

[tools.lustre.build]
minify = true
# Build the application into our server's `priv/static` directory so it can be
# deployed together with the backend.
outdir = "../server/priv/static"

[tools.lustre.dev]
host = "0.0.0.0"
# Configure an API proxy to forward requests to our backend during development.
# This lets us avoid CORS issues while the frontend and backend are running on
# different ports.
proxy = { from = "/api", to = "http://localhost:3000/api" }

[tools.lustre.html]
# Include Bootstrap in our project for simple styling.
stylesheets = [{ href = "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.8/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css" }]
scripts = [{ src = "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.8/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js" }]
```

This should make it easier for teams to share configuration for Lustre projects
without needing external scripts or documentation on what flags to pass. More
information can be found on the [TOML reference page](https://hexdocs.pm/lustre_dev_tools/toml-reference.html).

## Clearer handling of HTML, static assets, and build artifacts

One big wart in previous versions of dev tools was the handling of `index.html`,
static assets, and where build artifacts were placed. Previously when starting
the dev server, an `index.html` file would be generated in the root of your project
and used as the entry point during development. At the same time _development
builds_ of your application would be placed in the same `priv/static` directory
as your production builds, leading to confusion over which files were safe to
commit or deploy.

This has been massively cleaned up in v2, with the development server now no longer
generating **any** build artifacts in your project. Instead, dev tools is now fully
in control of the HTML entry file it serves. At build time, an `index.html` file
will now be generated in the output directory alongside your JavaScript and CSS
bundles.

In the previous section we already saw how this HTML file can be customised under
the `tools.lustre.html` table in your `gleam.toml`. Additional scripts, stylesheets
and meta tags can be injected through this configuration.

Additionally assets placed in the `assets/` directory in the root of your project
will now be served during development and copied to the output directory at build
time. This makes it easy and clear to include static assets like images, fonts,
or CSS in your projects. In development, changes to assets will be reflected in
real-time **without** a full page reload so feel free to nudge that div pixel-by-pixel
until it's just right.

Finally, the default output directory for builds has been changed from `priv/static`
to `dist/`. The previous directory was chosen to follow OTP application conventions,
but Lustre applications are JavaScript and following this convention was more
confusing than helpful. For full stack Gleam projects you should continue to build
your client applications into your server's `priv/static` directory, but this new
default will make it clearer for client-only projects that build artifacts placed
in `dist/` are meant to be deployed.

For more information on how assets are handled, check out the [assets page](https://hexdocs.pm/lustre_dev_tools/assets.html)
in the docs.

## And the rest

Nix users can finally rejoice with the new ability to specify local paths to the
Bun and Tailwind binaries dev tools uses to build your projects. Users that want
to dip into the JavaScript ecosystem without changing their build tooling can now
properly import dependencies from `node_modules` and have them work both during
development and in production builds. Dev tools will update your project's
`.gitignore` when it is first run to ensure build artifacts don't make their way
into your Git history.

---

Lustre is still largely maintained by me – Hayleigh – with the support of a small
number of contributors. To my existing sponsors on GitHub, thank you! Your support
has fueled me with both motivation and caffeine to keep the project growing 💕.

If you're interested in supporting Lustre, one of the best things you can do is
build something with it and tell everyone about it!

If you or your company are using Lustre in production, please consider supporting
the project financially over on [GitHub sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/hayleigh-dot-dev).
