# Lustre v5.7.0 released!

Hey folks, it's been a while since the last release: but that's a good thing!
Things are starting to wind down now that we've landed major performance improvements
and many of the core features we wanted to see. If all goes to plan, this will
likely be the last minor release until we hit v6.0.0 sometime in the future. Let's
see what's inside.

## Applications and the context api

In v5.3.0 we provided an implementation of the [WCCG Context protocol](https://github.com/webcomponents-cg/community-protocols/blob/main/proposals/context.md).
This allows components in Lustre (and Web Components in general) to provide data
to slotted children without needing to know about them directly. There's no reason
Lustre apps can't get in on the action though, so for v5.7.0 all types of Lustre
app can use the new `subscribe` effect to subscribe to context changes from any
parent elements.

Why might that be useful? We think the combination of Lustre's server components
along with a traditional client app unlocks a powerful pattern we've been interally
calling the "store pattern." This pattern involves a server component providing 
multiple context values for different server-side state: changes are broadcast
using the `provide` effect and the client application can `subscribe` to any
context values it needs. The client can `emit` events to communicate back to the
server to request new data or trigger updates. This approach can completely replace
traditional HTTP APIs and we're excited to see how people run away with this idea:
we'll be writing more about this in the future!

This new API also includes an effect to _unsubscribe_ from context changes; something
that was not possible until now. As context subscriptions are no-longer a component-only
feature, we've deprecated the `component.on_context_change` option in favour the
new effects.

Be mindful that _components_ should avoid calling the `subscribe` effect in their
`init` function, and instead should use the `component.on_connect` option to be
notified when the component is added to the DOM. Lustre components are Web Components
and share the same lifecycle as any other Web Component: that means when the component
is created, your `init` functions run but the component is not yet connected to
the DOM. As the context protocol is built on top of event listeners, subscribing
to context changes before the component is connected will an emit an event that
nobody is listening for!

## CSRF protection for server components

When the browser makes a HTTP request, it automatically includes any cookies and
credentials associated with the request's origin. In this past this has been an
attack vector for _cross-site request forgery_ (CSRF) attacks, where a malicious
website can trick a user's browser into making a request to a different site where
they are authenticated. 

These days, CORS headers can be used by browsers to mitigate these kinds of attacks
by blocking cross-origin requests that don't have the appropriate headers. For
WebSocket connections, however, CORS headers don't apply making it possible for a
malicious site to establish a WebSocket connection as a user.

A common mitigation for this is to embed a CSRF token in the page's HTML, and require
that token to be included in the WebSocket connection request. The client 
`<lustre-server-component>` will now detect the presence of a `<meta>` tag containing
a CSRF token or recognise if there is a `csrf-token` attribute on the component
itself, and include that token in the connection request. 

We recommend **all** applications using server components implement CSRF protection
in their apps, as well as validating the origin of any incoming WebSocket connections
on the server.

## And the rest

Form associated components now can be notified when a containing form is disabled
through the `on_form_disabled` configuration option, we've added a handful of new
attributes to work with the new [Command Invoker API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Invoker_Commands_API),
and a whole bunch of bug fixes.

## To the future

Development of a big library like Lustre never really _ends_, but for now we're
turning our attention to building out the things that orbit the library. That
means:

- Getting lustre/ui over the line. The library is a collection of unstyled 
  components that we hope will serve as the foundation for new styled libraries
  and in-house design systems. 

- Resurrecting fable: our version of Storybook to make it easy to develop components
  and view functions in isolation. The library has been functional for a while now,
  but we're not very happy about the API currently and want to dedicate some time
  to polishing the developer experience.

- Finally have a place to call home at `lustre.build`. We've had the domain for
  two years now but never found the time to set up anything more than a redirect
  to Hex. We want to change that!

These are all exciting projects but they are also a lot of work. Lustre/ui in
particular is a tremendous undertaking for a team of one-and-a-bit people. If
you're using Lustre in production, please consider supporting the project finanically
through [GitHub sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/hayleigh-dot-dev). That 
support helps keep the project m